
The two chapters in this part introduce the subject of Artificial Intelligence or AI
and our approach to the subject: that AI is the study of agents that exist in an
environment and perceive and act.
Section The Foundations of Artificial Intelligence
and subtracting machine called the Pascaline. Leibniz improved on this in 1694, building a
mechanical device that multiplied by doing repeated addition. Progress stalled for over a century
until Charles Babbage (1792-1871) dreamed that logarithm tables could be computed by machine.
He designed a machine for this task, but never completed the project. Instead, he turned to the
design of the Analytical Engine, for which Babbage invented the ideas of addressable memory,
stored programs, and conditional jumps. Although the idea of programmable machines was
not new—in 1805, Joseph Marie Jacquard invented a loom that could be programmed using
punched cards—Babbage's machine was the first artifact possessing the characteristics necessary
for universal computation. Babbage's colleague Ada Lovelace, daughter of the poet Lord Byron,
wrote programs for the Analytical Engine and even speculated that the machine could play chess
or compose music. Lovelace was the world's first programmer, and the first of many to endure
massive cost overruns and to have an ambitious project ultimately abandoned." Babbage's basic
design was proven viable by Doron Swade and his colleagues, who built a working model using
only the mechanical techniques available at Babbage's time (Swade, 1993). Babbage had the
right idea, but lacked the organizational skills to get his machine built.
AI also owes a debt to the software side of computer science, which has supplied the
operating systems, programming languages, and tools needed to write modern programs (and
papers about them). But this is one area where the debt has been repaid: work in AI has pioneered
many ideas that have made their way back to "mainstream" computer science, including time
sharing, interactive interpreters, the linked list data type, automatic storage management, and
some of the key concepts of object-oriented programming and integrated program development
environments with graphical user interfaces